full instructions with introduction can be found in 
instructions_audio.txt.  this file provides the minimum information 
needed to run the Sonification of Solar Harmonics (SoSH) Tool.  other 
important information regarding pure data is found in README_audio.txt, 
especially modifications required for running in windows.

if you are using the version of the SoSH Tool that includes demo data 
files, these will already be found in the data directory that was 
unpacked with the zip archive, in which case you may skip to step 2 
below.  the demo data files are the following three: mdi.average.modes, 
mdi.1216d_l=2_m=1_datar.wav and mdi.1216d_l=2_m=1_datai.wav .


follow these steps:

1) download data

the data are available at http://sun.stanford.edu/~tplarson/audio/, 
where you will find separate directories for MDI and HMI.  within each, 
you will find a series of directories that are day numbers suffixed with 
'd'.  the day number corresponds to the first day of the 72 day 
timeseries.  day number 1216 was 1 may 1996.  a full table converting 
day numbers to dates can be found at the above url as well.

clicking on a directory will show two ascii tables containing the mode 
paramaters; the file <instrument>.<daynumber>.modes must be downloaded.  
the second and larger file, with ".msplit" appended to the name, is only 
needed to use different frequency intervals for each m.  this is not 
needed by default, but its use is discussed in the full instructions.

next, click on the "wavfiles" subdirectory, where you will find a 
selection of modes labelled by l and m.  except for m=0, each mode has 
both a real and an imaginary part, labelled by "datar" and "datai" 
respectively.  pick an assortment of modes and download them to your 
data directory.

alternatively, averaged mode parameters can be found directly in each of 
the "MDI" and "HMI" directories.  you may elect to use these averaged 
parameters for all day numbers.  this option is the default for most 
patches.


2) using the patch

open the patch modefilter_standalone.pd .  if you are not using the data 
directory which was unpacked with the zip archive, you will need to set 
the path to the directory where you put the data.  do this by clicking 
the light blue bang at lower left.  a dialog box will open; just select 
any file in your data directory and the object [set-directory] will 
strip the file name and output the path.  you should now see your path 
show up in the message box at right.  if you now save the patch file, 
this will be saved as your default data directory and you won't need to 
set it any more.

next, click on the message box with "pd dsp 1", which will turn on 
digital signal processing (DSP).  finally, the inputs you must provide 
are the day number corresponding to the 72 day timeseries, the spherical 
harmonic degree l, the radial order n, and the azimuthal order m.  note 
that even if you want to leave one of these at its default value of 
zero, you must still click on the number box and enter 0.  now, to 
search for this mode, click the green bang at the upper left.  if found, 
the input arrays will be loaded, the fft will run, the gain will be 
generated, the gain and the fft will be multiplied and shifted before 
being inverse transformed, and the filtered audio will play.  to hear 
it, enter a number for the output level.  you will likely want to adjust 
the playback sample rate and downshift factor. you can turn off playback 
by clicking the toggle.  you may also elect to save the output as a wav 
file file by clicking the light blue bang at lower right.

EXAMPLE: if using the demo data files, simply turn on DSP and then enter 
the following 4 integers at the top of the patch: 1 for degree l, 21 for 
radial order n, 1 for azimuthal order m, and 1216 for day number.  do 
press enter each time.  once done, click the circle beneath "search for 
modes".  at lower right, enter a number for the output level.  once the 
fft completes, the sound will play.  it will be quite high.  to hear the 
effect of downshifting, enter 4 for the downshift factor.


3) skip to the end

open example_sum.pd to see an example of how to play 5 modes at once.  
first reset the data directory if needed.  set the day number for all 
five, and then specify the separate modes along the right edge.  details 
can be found in section 5 of the full instructions.
